KEP-5241: Beta Feature Gate Promotion Requirements (#5242)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-architecture/5241-beta-featuregate-promotion-requirements/README.md

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Features gates must include all functional, security, monitoring, and testing requirements along with

Reviewer: unless i am mistaken, the summary adds 'monitoring' requirements, but its not highlighted earlier.  i do not see it called out in beta or GA explicitly unless i missed it.  relevant instrumentation is important, but i am not sure if addition of a metric observed during a beta phase extends the beta phase, blocks promotion to GA phase, or what.  wdyt?

resolving all issues and gaps identified prior to being enabled by default.
The only valid GA criteria are “all issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved”.

## Motivation

Features gates that are enabled by default are enabled in every production Kubernetes cluster in the world.
We must avoid making every production cluster into unstable or incomplete feature testing clusters.
Even feature gates that make flags accessible, but require a secondary configuration to use must be
stable, because it is unrealistic to expect everyone to understand the graduation stages of various flags
for each release: the only stages that really matter are "takes enabling an explicit alpha feature gate"
and "my production cluster accepts this as valid by default".

### Goals

* Features gates must include all functional, security, monitoring, and testing requirements along with
  resolving all issues and gaps identified prior to being enabled by default.

> * The only valid GA criteria are “all issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved”.

Reviewer 2: so...my only concern here is that this implies "zero bugs" which is not realistic. We need some flexibility to triage things that are known but are not release blocking. Should we soften this a little to accommodate that? Or am I just being too literal?

Author: Zero known bugs is a safer starting point for all features.  "Bugs" that are actually veiled feature requests certainly wouldn't count as a bug.  There's at least one apimachinery feature in recent memory that went GA without sufficient checking for bugs and it's a good example of needing to dig and address our reported issues prior to going GA.

Ultimately, we don't generally check every sig's homework and the decision of bug vs feature is up to them, but let's set the bar in a spot that encourages digging into all reported issues and making informed choices about, "is this really good enough to turn on in all production clusters".

Reviewer 2: Ok, thanks. Makes sense to me.

### Non-Goals

* Changing beta APIs off by default rules.
* Change the imperfect mechanisms we have for API evolution.

## Proposal

Kubernetes feature gates have three levels: GA (locked on), GA (disable-able), Beta, and Alpha.
1. GA (locked-on) means that a feature gate is unconditionally enabled in all production kubernetes clusters and
   that feature cannot be disabled.

> 2. GA (disable-able) is only for features gates that include a new API serialization that cannot be enabled by default 

Reviewer 2: yes, thank you

   until the API reaches stable.  This means that the first time the API is enabled in production, the feature will
   be GA, but also can be disabled.  This is a less common state and does not apply to most features.
3. Beta means that a feature gate is usually enabled in all production Kubernetes clusters by default
   and that feature can be disabled.
   Exceptions exist for entirely new APIs and some node features, but this broadly the case.

> 4Alpha means that a feature gate is disabled in all production Kubernetes clusters by default and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Alpha means that a feature gate is disabled in all production Kubernetes clusters by default and
```

The first time we take a feature gate enabled by default in production Kubernetes clusters, we must
have a way to disable the feature in case of unexpected stability, performance, or security issues.

Enabling incomplete features in production Kubernetes clusters by default is irresponsible.
Features that are known to be incomplete naturally bring with them additional stability, performance, and security issues.
Once a feature has been enabled in a production Kubernetes cluster by default, adding to it carries
greater risk to upgrading clusters and the ecosystem.
The feature can easily have become relied upon by workloads and other platform extensions.
If an accident happens in adding those capabilities with stability, performance, and security the
cost to disable those features in a cluster becomes significantly greater and breaks existing
clusters, workloads and use-cases.
This posture makes upgrades higher risk than necessary.

To balance these concerns, we are changing how we evaluate Beta and GA stability criteria.
The only valid GA criteria are “all issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved”.
Promotion from Beta to GA must be zero-diff for the release.

> This means that Beta criteria must include all functional, security, monitoring, and testing requirements along

Reviewer 2: I don't think adding a new metric should "automatically" require a second beta, for these reasons:
1) Metrics themselves have independent alpha/beta/stable guarantees which are not generally in sync with the feature they monitor.
2) There is space between metrics that are "necessary to support the feature in production" and those that are "useful to have".

The evaluation of whether the metrics that are necessary to support a feature in production are all there is a GA criteria. This KEP update is saying that "we should require those to be available in beta", which I think is a good thing.

Even if we screw that up, and miss something that is critical in beta, adding it before GA should be sufficient. I don't think we want to say "all bugs/missing metrics must be fixed and *then* we must do *another* beta before GA".

> This means that Beta criteria must include all functional, security, monitoring, and testing requirements along

Author: I've updated "zero-diff" to "no significant change" to try to better reflect our intent.

The only valid GA criteria are “all issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved”.

## Motivation

Features gates that are enabled by default are enabled in every production Kubernetes cluster in the world.
We must avoid making every production cluster into unstable or incomplete feature testing clusters.
Even feature gates that make flags accessible, but require a secondary configuration to use must be
stable, because it is unrealistic to expect everyone to understand the graduation stages of various flags
for each release: the only stages that really matter are "takes enabling an explicit alpha feature gate"
and "my production cluster accepts this as valid by default".

### Goals

* Features gates must include all functional, security, and testing requirements along with
  resolving all issues and gaps identified prior to being enabled by default.
* The only valid GA criteria are “all issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved”.

### Non-Goals

* Changing beta APIs off by default rules.
* Change the imperfect mechanisms we have for API evolution.

## Proposal

Kubernetes feature gates have three levels: GA, Beta, and Alpha.

> 1. GA means that a feature gate is unconditionally enabled in all production kubernetes clusters and

Reviewer 3: we have two levels here GA, and GA locked by default, without locked by default it can be disabled, right?

   that feature cannot be disabled.
2. Beta means that a feature gate is usually enabled in all production Kubernetes clusters by default
   and that feature can be disabled.

>    Exceptions exist for entirely new APIs and some node features, but this broadly the case.

Reviewer 3: this tends to confuse readers and new developers not familiar with the the duality of API version v1alpha1, v1beta1, v1 / feature gate alpha,beta, GA and the coupling of both lifecycles. Since the restriction about beta apis disabled by default, that makes feature gates that are beta and depende on api beta versions disabled by default.
`Beta features non dependent on beta APIs are usually enabled by default` ??? I do not know well how to express this conundrum

Author: Adding the detail about how we have the GA and disable-able state helped I think.

The first time we take a feature gate enabled by default in production Kubernetes clusters, we must
have a way to disable the feature in case of unexpected stability, performance, or security issues.

Enabling incomplete features in production Kubernetes clusters by default is irresponsible.
Features that are known to be incomplete naturally bring with them additional stability, performance, and security issues.
Once a feature has been enabled in a production Kubernetes cluster by default, adding to it carries
greater risk to upgrading clusters and the ecosystem.
The feature can easily have become relied upon by workloads and other platform extensions.
If an accident happens in adding those capabilities with stability, performance, and security the
cost to disable those features in a cluster becomes significantly greater and breaks existing
clusters, workloads and use-cases.
This posture makes upgrades higher risk than necessary.

To balance these concerns, we are changing how we evaluate Beta and GA stability criteria.
The only valid GA criteria are “all issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved”.
Promotion from Beta to GA must be zero-diff for the release.

> This means that Beta criteria must include all functional, security, and testing requirements along

Reviewer 4: I think we should also add monitoring and I know that @lmktfy has mentioned satisfactory documentation in beta before we promote to GA.

Author: > I think we should also add monitoring and I know that @lmktfy has mentioned satisfactory documentation in beta before we promote to GA.

updating

with resolving all issues and gaps identified prior to beta.

Phasing in larger features over time can be done by bringing separate feature gates through alpha, beta, and GA.
Each feature gate needs to meet the beta and GA criteria for completeness, functional, security, and testing.

> After meeting hte criteria for enabled by default, and at the sig's discretion, the new feature gate could be 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After meeting the criteria for enabled by default, and at the SIG's discretion, the new feature gate could be 
```

set to enabled by default in the release it is introduced.
Importantly, the features need to behave in a way that allows old and new clients to interoperate and new additions
to larger features able to be independently disablable with their own path for GA.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### What if I need to add capability to my feature?
To handle this situation, we described above how to add second feature gate for the new behavior.
This provides a mechanism for adding needed capability, but ensures that
cluster-admins never end up stuck after upgrade because they rely on v1.Y-1 behavior that new capability
in v1.Y broke under the same feature gate.

#### Who will make sure that new KEPs follow the promotion rules?

> We'll adjust the KEP template to indicate the allowed criteria, so authors should notice.

Reviewer 5: Only for new features. Authors of some existing KEP only notice if they actively sync with the KEP template (rarely done) or we announce this KEP here widely.

Reviewer 6: There's another topic about that in SIG Arch today. [bit.ly/kep-versioning_phase1](https://bit.ly/kep-versioning_phase1)
